
Thu Jul  5 08:33:12 EDT 2012

A couple bugs in yices2 have supposedly been fixed, so I think that's worth
getting working. Or at least trying out.

Other than that, I think I should clean something, anything really, just to
make progress cleaning.

Other than that... I think now's a reasonable time to look into the modularity
question in more depth. Think about how to do it right in the long term, even
if I don't want to implement all that right now.

Okay? Sounds like a plan.

First step: get and try yicse2 update.

Thu Jul  5 08:48:19 EDT 2012

That seems to have resolved the issues I was having. Exposing new issues.

There's some type bug I don't understand. It looks like, perhaps, there's a
problem with shadowing.

Let me dump out the poly, inlined, and simpl expressions, see if I can't
identify where the issue first shows up.

Thu Jul  5 08:57:10 EDT 2012

In simpl, there's something called 'v'.
In the yices expression, there's nothing called 'v'. I think somehow 'v' got
renamed to 'x'?

Oops. My mistake. Simplification gets rid of 'v'... oh. I bet I know what the
problem is. I bet I have to do alpha renaming that I don't do...

Can I come up with an example? One that I can test?

Well, the problem is clearly in the seri stuff, not the yices stuff. And I'm
pretty sure it's in simplification, but that means its in elaboration too.
Because I have a variable 'x' with two different types in an expression. That
is, I have a poorly typed expression.

Here's the idea... Let me see if I can come up with an example.

Consider the following expression of type:
 Foo -> Bar -> Foo
\(x::Foo) -> (\(y::Foo) -> (\(x::Bar) -> (y::Foo))) (x::Foo)

If I simplify naively...

\(x::Foo) -> (\(x::bar) -> (x::Foo))

And now we have a poorly typed expression. We need some sort of alpha
renaming.

At the heart of the problem is, I'm substituting y gets x, but x conflicts
with a name that is defined within the expression. So, perhaps what I want
first, is to rename all the ...

I want to do a substitution:
  (\y -> foo) x

This means, anywhere in foo where I define in a new scope a variable with name
'x', I should rename it to something else.

In general:
  (\y -> foo) bar

Let bar_free be the free names in bar.
Any introduction of a new name in foo, via either lambda term or pattern
binding, needs to be renamed to something that isn't in bar_free, before
performing the substitution. Then I can substitute without worry.

I think this wasn't a problem that showed up with elaboration, because I
always perform the substitutions from the top down? 'bar' can't contain any
free variables bound above, because then there's a lambda above, which means
we would not have tried to do this substitution yet.

Perhaps, then, I want two different kinds of lambda reduction rules. One for
elaborate, and one for simplify. Or... just have them both do the work of
simplify, which will work for elaborate fine, with just a possible performance
penalty I can worry about later.

Okay, so this is not so hard. I'll want two functions:

free :: Exp -> [Name]
Gets a list of the free variables in the given expression.

alpharename :: [Name] -> Exp -> Exp
Given a list of names that are bad, and an expression, rename each new name in
the given expression that's bad with a name that isn't bad. Probably by
appending a numeric suffix. So, x is renamed to x0, or x1, or some such.

Fine. Shall I give it a try? Sure. I'll let you know what happens.

Thu Jul  5 10:28:17 EDT 2012

Brief interlude. Talked to Nirav.

Next big goal should be pvs. It's just transforming seri declarations of data
types and functions to pvs. Shouldn't be hard.

There's also an idea to think about a paper. Story is: a way of describing
generic smt queries, which can be targeted to different back ends, that you
can interact with through haskell. As an example, we could implement in
haskell a simple model checker that uses SMT via seri for brunt of its work,
now people no longer have to worry about low level interfaces to SMT solvers.
Or some such.

Thu Jul  5 10:31:30 EDT 2012

Implementing alpha renaming is annoying.

What I want to do is... we have a list of bad names. And we should have a list
of renames. LamE adds to the renames. Patterns add to the renames. VarEs are
renamed if they are in the renames. It's not so bad.

Thu Jul  5 10:55:05 EDT 2012

Okay, so I implemented the rough draft. Let's see if it works at all.

Hum. I get <<loop>>. That's not really what I want now, is it...

Thu Jul  5 11:45:56 EDT 2012

Fixed that bug, and others.

Now I have the problem: I'm picking a new name which isn't bad, but it already
exists in the expression, which we really don't want. A valid new name is...
not bad, not a name in the existing expression.

Thu Jul  5 11:57:26 EDT 2012

Okay! Looks like I fixed that bug. But now we have another issue. yices1 and
yices2 disagree on the bluespec query...

Let me debug it after lunch.

Thu Jul  5 13:05:40 EDT 2012

It's another bug in yices2. I'm confident of that. So I'll let this go until
the bug is fixed.

Thu Jul  5 13:07:07 EDT 2012

Cool! On to the next step: pvs.

The goal is to translate seri declarations to pvs. First step: some research.
Figure out what all features pvs supports that I can make use of.

In particular, look out for things like:
 - algebraic data types
 - polymorphism
 - classes and overloading?
 - pattern matching

It might be good to try translating a bunch of things by hand first, just to
get the hang of pvs.

Once I get a feel for things, the steps are fairly straight forward.
- define a pvs abstract syntax.
- implement a pvs target.

A great example, I think, would be to code up the Bluespec.sri query in pvs,
and prove that, if they start in the empty state, the two compositions are
equivalent. This should actually be fun.

Thu Jul  5 13:16:53 EDT 2012

Looks like data types can be defined just as in yices1, and they can be
polymorphic.

First step: implement FIFO2 in pvs. And maybe, for the fun of it, I can try to
prove something. Prove that enq followed by deq is like a nop, but only if the
fifo doesn't start full.

Thu Jul  5 14:37:14 EDT 2012

Okay, I have all the declarations for the bluespec example, I think. First
step, I want to prove that:
  forall states s, if (f s) is not the empty fifo, (ppc s = pcp s).
  
Thu Jul  5 14:57:13 EDT 2012

Done. I used (grind). It did all the real work. Cool. So I have a proof.

The next step?

Well, so I have a sense now of the language. Of how to define data types and
function types.

I don't have a good sense of how overloading works. For instance, the =
operator worked for my newly defined types without my saying how. Perhaps they
have some facility in their overloading that I could leverage for type
classes.

Then I should start an abstract syntax. For now, just the constructs I need or
expect to use.

I'll need to put some thought into how to organize theories.

Then go from there.

In the meantime, my yices2 bug has supposedly been fixed. Let me try that out.

Thu Jul  5 15:08:26 EDT 2012

Yup. That fixed my bug. So yices2 is officially declared... working as well as
yices1.

Thu Jul  5 15:12:46 EDT 2012

Next step: understand overloading in pvs.

So, it looks like we can overload names and operators so long as the type
signatures are different for each. This is good. So, to translate classes, we
would do the following:
 ClassD - ignored.
 InstD - generate a regular function for each method with the signature from
the class. Easy.

Good.

Also good: we have a summary of the grammar for pvs, which I can use as
motivation for the structure of the abstract pvs syntax which I make.

I'll have to think about how to deal with data types declared in their own
modules and the needed importing statements. Perhaps I can just brute force
and import every data type I've declared so far for every module. That seems
not too unreasonable.

Good!

I think I'm ready to start on the abstract syntax for pvs.

Thu Jul  5 16:01:09 EDT 2012

The trouble is... there are a lot of constructs and things you can express in
pvs that I won't ever want to express. Should I support these in the abstract
syntax? Or take a subset?

How about this, let me just have the subset I think I'll use. Don't worry
about making it super general. See if that comes back to bite me later.

