
Sun Sep 16 09:20:41 EDT 2012

I was reading up on proposals for Haskell', and among the interesting ideas is
lambda-case. It's a case statement without the argument.

I believe this would be good to use in my seri IR.
Why? Because application, lambda, and case statements all overlap.

(\x -> foo x) a

and

case a of
    x -> foo x

Are two different ways of expressing exactly the same thing.

Both case and lambda does some sort of name binding, both application with
lambda and case involve beta reduction. There is a lot of code in the
elaborator which is common between beta reduction and case application.

So the proposal is this. Replace LamE and CaseE with a single... Let's call it
LamE still, which takes a list of matches:

LamE [Match]

Err... Actually, to avoid confusion, I should give it a different name...

LCaseE ?
MatchE ?
LamatchE?

Err... AbsE?

What's it doing? It's doing abstraction and pattern matching...

It's not lambda and not case, because those have known meanings. Perhaps I can
call it... BindE? No...

Anyway, not sure what to call it, but I think this is an improvement. For now
just call it LCaseE.

CaseE x ms    ===     AppE (LCaseE ms) x
LamE s b      ===     LCaseE [Match (VarP s) b]

We lose no information at all. We reduce the number of constructors in the IR
by one. We don't have to duplicate code for beta reduction and name binding.

LaceE ... oh, I like that name. Use it.

And there are many places where this would be the perfect construct. For
example, in multi-clause function definitions and lambdas with pattern
matching we currently have to introduce a dummy name to get at the pattern
matching of case.

I think this is totally a good idea. So I'm going to try it out. It will be a
bit of work to change the existing implementation, but I think it should be
worth it in terms of simplicity.

Another thing I want to mention is haskell 2010 supports pattern guards, which
give a pattern abstraction kind of thing. That is, they support pattern
matching on abstract data types. This might be a good opportunity to try this
out. For example, we could make the IR an abstract data type...

I think it's too much to worry about all at once, but it's something to keep
in mind.

Cool. I'm going to try this out.

First step: get serit and serie to work again under this new ir.

Sun Sep 16 09:54:29 EDT 2012

Started working on this. The code seems to be getting simpler, which is good.

Now, I've run into the multi-clause thing, and there's a slight annoyance.

What we are doing is:

foo pa1 pb1 = e1
foo pa2 pb2 = e2

Has to be translated as:

foo = \a b -> case (a, b) of
                (pa1, pb1) -> e1
                (pa2, pb2) -> e2

And that's annoying. The problem is, because case only supports a single
argument, we have to combine everything together in an unpleasant way.

Question is... can we have the LaceE support multiple arguments? Does that
make sense to do? Nirav was always telling me that's one way to make the
elaborator faster... But here it's more natural...

There's no problem with a representation like that. Instead of Match, use
Clause. Or just make Match into a clause.

Match = Match [Pat] Exp

This makes it easy to do multi argument lambdas as just a single case.
It lets us do multi-clause functions trivially.

How do you do elaboration?

Well, you can just wait until the number of arguments to your function matches
the number of patterns before attempting a match.

There's also a question of how I'm going to pretty print these things. We can
turn it into a case if we have enough args. We can turn it into a lambda if
there is only one match. But if there are multiple matches and not fully
applied, we need to introduce names to go to case...

So support a new syntax for this expression.

lace args of 
  matches


And in this case, allow the number of args to be less than the number of
patterns in order to make a function. Is that too confusing?

If I use this, then I could get rid of case and lambda syntax. Or... perhaps
we require all arguments be present, just using _ for those to be applied?

Case can be described using lace.

\x -> foo x

Becomes:

lace _ of { x -> foo x }
                  
Not quite so nice... but we can have the sugar still anyway.

For example:

&& :: Bool -> Bool -> Bool;
&& = lace _, _ of {
       True, x -> x
       False, _ -> False;
};

Um... Maybe I'm not so much a fan of how the arguments are specified.
We could allow case to have these '_' arguments.

Then have a syntax assuming no arguments.

&& = \ { True, x -> x
       ; False, _ -> False }

And we no longer need support for multi-clause functions.

&& = lace _, _ of {
        True, x -> x;
        False, _ -> False;
    }

I don't know. We can introduce names, because they are used only locally, so
long as we can pick names the user isn't allowed to pick. Then turn it into a
case statement. So I don't really have to worry about this now. I can still
have the internal representation be a mutli-arg lace.

Okay. Let me try this now then.

Question. Now that we have multi-arg laces, should we have multi-arg
applications too?

AppE Exp [Exp]?

We can certainly easily enough represent a single version...
We want an easy way to make sure we have as many arguments as we need. It lets
us do simultaneous reduction.

We can have an elaboration step which turns:

AppE (AppE f xs) ys

Into: AppE f (xs ++ ys)

I see no reason not to do this while I'm in the midst of rewriting everything
anyway... This should save on memory too perhaps? appsE is the same now as
AppE, except that AppE takes the function as a separate argument.

Let me just remind myself about what sorts of reasons I may have for not
wanting to do this. In the IR we want two things, which aren't always in
agreement: 1. High level information. 2. simplicity.

So, for example, we don't want to have an if statement, because it doesn't add
any high level information you can't get with case statement, but it does add
another case to worry about.

Adding multiple arguments to AppE would have caused problems, if lambda is
only single argument, because then things would have gotten more complicated,
perhaps. But with lambda (or lace, as the case may be) having multiple
arguments, it doesn't seem any more complex, and we have higher level
information. Well, not really higher level, but more compact. We can avoid
lots of folds and unfolds.

There is one slight problem. And it's what I showed above. There are two
representations for: f a b.

AppE f [a, b]

And:

AppE (AppE f [a]) [b]

I don't like that one bit.

Oh well. Let me go with it anyway, because I can't think of a concrete example
where that actually causes more problems than I already have. We can always
canonicalize the representation.

Good. Let me get on this way now then.

Sun Sep 16 10:54:14 EDT 2012

Oh... I should totally use pattern guards to implement pretty printing. That
is the perfect opportunity to try them out.

Sun Sep 16 13:20:52 EDT 2012

Okay! Well, wow. I've managed to get serit up and running, hopefully
correctly. I pretty print lace as: case of { ... }
I may wish to add that syntax to my parser.

I do think this is an improvement. It's just a whole lot of work...
I think it's lunch time now.

Sun Sep 16 18:41:45 EDT 2012

Okay! Where are we now...

The bulk of the work has been done. This does indeed reduce duplicate code.

I'm not convinced multi-arg apps is the nicest thing, but I think it fits
better with multi-pattern case than single arg app. So I'll leave it in.

I threw out sharing code in the elaborator, because I didn't want to deal with
it. If I want to add that back later... I'll have to add it back later.

Pattern guards are very very nice. A lot of code cleanup has come from those.

There's some bugs. Certainly in the elaborator, maybe in the delambdifier.
They manifest in the array examples. I need to work out those issues before I
can switch this over to the master branch.

It's slightly unfortunate that we now pretty print syntax we have no hope of
parsing at this point. I hope that's okay? I may need to deal with the issue
later.

Sun Sep 16 18:55:38 EDT 2012

How do I find this bug? It's an array bug. I need to step through elaboration
somehow. Figure out what didn't elaborate as expected.

How about wrap elab: show pre and post elaboration. That should make things
more clear.

Sun Sep 16 19:43:15 EDT 2012

Oh... here's something interesting.

The issue is we have:


(\MkArray _ f -> f)
(MkArray (0, 2) (\j -> ...))

And that application wasn't reduced.

But... do you see the problem? The lambda looks like it takes 3 arguments
when it should only be taking 1, and when it is given just one.

Well... this could be an issue with the pretty printer. Patterns which are not
atomic must have parenthesis in lambdas.

Let me look a little more to see if I can see more info. Otherwise I'll fix
the pretty printer and then see what's up.

Sun Sep 16 19:58:10 EDT 2012

Okay, I think I figured it out.

We have something of this form:

(\(Foo f) -> f) x y

So, LaceE, takes 1 argument, is applied to 2!

So, what we should really do is, apply as many arguments as the lambda takes,
if we have enough. If there are any arguments left over, then apply those to
the result.

Sun Sep 16 20:04:15 EDT 2012

Yup! That was the trouble. Let's see what all more bugs we have now.

Sun Sep 16 20:15:35 EDT 2012

And same problem with yices target. I can fix that.

Sun Sep 16 20:27:59 EDT 2012

Problem fixed. Everything works again now.

Trouble is... sadly... it's worse performing on BCL. From 5.5 to 7.8 seconds.
Not terrible... But still... Unfortunate.

Well, I ought to be able to figure out what's up with that, as performance
becomes problematic.

What do you think? Should I merge this to the master branch?

Let me sleep on it. I think I will, because there is a lot of good stuff about
this: we get rid of duplicated code, we reduce the number of IR constructors,
we clean up with pattern guards, we got rid of unused code which was
cluttering things up.

