
Sun Oct 28 09:31:22 EDT 2012

I implemented the Show class. It seems to work swell. I don't have auto
deriving yet.

So, at this point, it seems like we would like to have a big clean up of
everything. Everything is going to be run in IO... Get rid of --query...

So the idea, then, is to move all the tests to... somewhere. A common folder.
Not sure where.

I'm envisioning two test programs:
* the standard tests
* the SMT tests

We split them up, because the standard tests can be compiled to Haskell, while
the SMT tests can't.

The standard tests are just the one file.
The SMT tests will make use of the queries spread across different files.
Though I suppose they could be moved to the same file?
I think I like keeping them separate...

Let me think about what I want to do. Clearly the next step is to convert all
the Query top level functions to IO. It's just a question of whether I want to
reorganize them at this point or not? Put them in the same file together or
not?
 
Sun Oct 28 09:54:20 EDT 2012

Here are my thoughts.

First step, the step to take today: just switch everything over to IO. Don't
reorganize.

Later on I'll reorganize as follows: separate all the .sri code into its own
directory. Move Seri.Lib.Prelude to Prelude. Things like that. Try to mimic
the haskell organization as much as I can, because it would be great if we
could run the haskell compiler on seri code, for example (if only haskell had
support for numeric type syntax...)

Let me get going on the removal of --query. See how far I can get in an hour.

First thing to note: the queries themselves choose which solver to run on.
This could be troublesome if you don't want to run on yices1... Oh well. Worry
about it later.

Sun Oct 28 10:56:15 EDT 2012

Cool. I got rid of --query. 

What's next? I'm not going to do any more work right now, I just want to know
what I should be thinking about.

Well, implement STP as a solver, and Z3. Implement the runSTP and runZ3 seri
primitives. Then, at this point, I'll want to figure out how to augment Query
and Free with a particular solver. It would be nice to have support for a pure
SAT solver too, I should look to see if I can find any nice SAT solvers.

There's lots of cleanup work there for me to do too. Hopefully I can keep on
top of everything. It does feel a little bit like I'm loosing track of
everything that's going on with seri.

