
Fri Jun 20 18:51:48 EDT 2014

Goal is to get the traceS infrastructure in much better shape.

The idea is: it's hard to figure out why things blow up. I believe it would be
much easier if you could see the symbolic state of things, especially in the
recursive functions that blow up.

So we have a primitive, traceS, which prints that out. At least, in theory. In
practice there is a lot of work to do to make it work well enough to be useful

My driving test case: ssketch is blowing up for reasons I don't expect. Like a
Map is becoming symbolic when it shouldn't.

The trouble is, when I try to trace the map, it just hangs.

First step: verify it hangs during tracing, by adding a profiling pragma.

Yes. Profiling puts all the time in Trace.

I have two comments:

1. Trace should be such that it never blows up.
Maybe it's slow to print things, but it should keep printing and printing.
It should recognize bottom as such and explicitly say "_|_", maybe with an
error message if we have it.

I suppose if you have a cycle in the data structure, it would print forever...
Unless we can handle that by sharing (which would be cool), but that's not a
big deal right now.

2. Boolean formulas should print like they do for debug.

If I'm going to do (1), I think I should do (2) first, because it makes sense,
perhaps, to have the test for _|_ in the same place as the test for sharing
and debug and such?

This makes an easy first step, I think:

I. Change the debug solver to use traceS0 to print the formula instead of
"assert". 

Actually, I could split this into a few smaller steps.

1+ Move Smten.Runtime.Debug to smten-base
2+ Implement traceS_BoolFF using debug
Perhaps in Smten.Runtime.Debug.BoolFF.
3+ Use traceS_BoolFF in the instance of traceS0 for BoolF.
4+ Run ssketch now - it should print the boolean formulas much more pretty
5+ Change Debug solver to use traceS_BoolFF.

Then consider what the best thing to do next is.

Sat Jun 21 21:31:52 EDT 2014

It looks like the trace for ssketch may be working. But it's printing out
nothing.

Here's what I should do next...

What I want to do is pass the type name to the traceSD function. If there are
multiple alternatives, list it as:
  Foo {
    FooA [...] 
    FooB [...]
    ...
 }

Then, if it is empty, I should see that explicitly.

Sat Jun 21 22:44:53 EDT 2014

Now, tracing in ssketch, it says "variable i not found".

That is, we run into an error...

How can that be?

If that map, or a field of it, is an error.

And what do I want to do in this case?

See that it is an error, and mark it as such.

Whose job is it to do this though?

Sat Jun 21 23:28:21 EDT 2014

Things seem to be working better now. I'm not sure what changed.

I think tracing is now in good enough shape to explore more what the
performance problems in ssketch are. Let me try it out, and fix issues as they
come up.

